Integrate Existing `etcd` Clusters with `etcd-druid` (#957)
gardener/etcd-druid: docs/usage/migrating-existing-etcd-cluster.md

# Migrating an Existing etcd Cluster to an etcd-druid Managed etcd Cluster

This guide provides a comprehensive procedure to migrate an existing (unmanaged) etcd cluster into an etcd-druid managed etcd cluster.

---

## Prerequisites

- **Deploy etcd-druid:** Follow the installation steps in the [etcd-druid documentation](https://gardener.github.io/etcd-druid/deployment/getting-started-locally/getting-started-locally.html) to deploy the etcd-druid operator in your environment.

## Overview

> `etcd-druid` supports the integration of new etcd members into an existing `etcd` cluster through the `etcd.spec.etcd.existingCluster` configuration. This capability ensures that when new managed members are added, they automatically join the pre-existing cluster, facilitating seamless migrations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`etcd-druid` supports the integration of new etcd members into an existing `etcd` cluster through the `etcd.spec.etcd.existingCluster` configuration. This capability ensures that when new managed members are added, they automatically join the pre-existing cluster, allowing etcd-druid to eventually "adopt" the etcd cluster.
```

> **Note:**  
> - The `existingCluster` configuration is evaluated during the bootstrapping of new cluster members.  
> - It is crucial to utilize identical TLS certificates for the new etcd Custom Resource (CR) when joining an existing cluster to ensure secure communication.

## Key Considerations

### Single-Node `etcd` Cluster Migration

- **From Single-Node to Three-Node:** Transitioning from a single-node to a three-node etcd cluster can be achieved with zero downtime. However, once expanded to a multi-member configuration, reducing back to a single-node setup is not supported by `etcd-druid`.

> - **From Single-Node to Single-Node:** Migrations of this nature typically involve some downtime. You are required to capture a snapshot using the [etcd-backup-restore tool](https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/blob/master/docs/deployment/getting_started.md#taking-scheduled-snapshot), upload it to your designated backup bucket, and configure your new etcd CR to restore from this snapshot.

Reviewer: Why would there be downtime involved? The cluster gets scaled up from 1 to 2 members, and as long as both members are healthy, there's quorum. And then the user removes the old member from the cluster via `etcdctl member remove` call, which scales down the cluster size to 1 member, which still ensures quorum. I don't see why this would 'typically involve some downtime". Yes, there is a possibility of quorum loss if one of the members becomes unhealthy during this migration process. But that's a possibility for a 3-node cluster migration too, if 3 members go down.

Can you please re-word this?

### Multi-Node `etcd` Cluster Migration

- **Expanding to a Six-Node Cluster:** Initially, a three-node cluster will temporarily function as a six-node cluster by adding three new managed nodes. After these new members synchronize, the original unmanaged nodes can be decommissioned, enabling a migration without any service interruption.

## Migration Steps

### Step 1: Gather Existing Cluster Information

Collect crucial data about your current cluster configuration:

> - **Member URLs:** These are the URLs used for peer communications among cluster members.

Reviewer: Can you please explain here whether the MemberURL map keys represent the member names of IDs or pod names? Makes it easier for consumption.

- **Endpoint:** This is the service endpoint utilized for etcd client interactions.

**Example Configuration:**

```yaml
memberURLs:
  etcd-0:
    - https://etcd-0:2380
  etcd-1:
    - https://etcd-1:2380
  etcd-2:
    - https://etcd-2:2380
endpoint: https://etcd:2379
```

### Step 2: Configure the etcd-druid Managed Cluster

Draft a new etcd Custom Resource (CR) that includes the `existingCluster` configuration to facilitate the migration:

```yaml
apiVersion: druid.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
kind: Etcd
metadata:
  name: etcd-test
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: etcd-statefulset
  labels:
    app: etcd-statefulset
  etcd:
    metrics: basic
    existingCluster:
      memberURLs:
        etcd-0:
          - http://etcd-0.etcd:2380
        etcd-1:
          - http://etcd-1.etcd:2380
        etcd-2: 
          - http://etcd-2.etcd:2380

>       endpoint: http://etcd:2379

Reviewer: Previous example used `https`, while this uses `http`. Please correct it.
